Assume transaction cost is linearly related to
the trade size as a fraction of the average daily volume.
Since we won't know the actual daily volume until the day that we're executing,
we want to use past data as an estimate for future daily volume.
This will be kind of noisy if we simply use the prior day's daily volume,
so we'd prefer a more stable estimate like a 30-day rolling average.
A commonly used estimate for linear market impact is that if a trade size is
one percent of the average daily, volume this moves the price by 10 basis points.
Note that this is 10 basis points as a fraction of the original price,
so it's a percent change in price.
Let's define two terms;
trade and trade size.
The trade is the dollar amount to be traded,
which is the desired position minus the previous day's position.
The trade size on the other hand is the trade divided by the average dollar volume.
The impact of trading is a percent change in price,
so it's the change in price as a fraction of the original price.
Let's see how to define the price impact in terms of variables that we've seen here.
We'll write out this ratio,
change in price divided by the trade size.
This includes the assumption that a trade size,
which is one percent of average daily volume moves the price by 10 basis points.
Remember that 10 basis points is 10 divided by 10 raised to the fourth power.
Also, recall that one percent is one divided by 100.
If we do some simplifications and substitutions,
and isolate the percent change of price on one side,
it looks like this.
Don't worry about all the steps that it took to get to this version of the formula,
because you'll see the step-by-step derivation in the notebook of the coding exercise.
The point is that we can estimate the price impact based on data that we have.
There's the current day's optimal holding,
which is found with portfolio optimization.
There's also the previous day's holding.
Finally, there's the estimate for that day's average daily volume.
For convenience, we'll collect the two values that are not
the holdings and refer to them as one term, lambda.
Remember that the lambda term contains one divided by the average daily volume.
So now, we have the percent change in price that can be
estimated as lambda times the trade.
Let's go from the price impact to the cost of trading itself.
The transaction cost is in dollars,
and it's the percent change in price times the amount to traded.
The larger the change in price,
the higher the cost.
Also, the more that is traded,
We had just defined the percent change in price in terms of lambda and the trade,
so we can do some substitution here.
Notice that the trade term appears twice,
so we can clean up the notation a bit,
so that the trade term is in squared.
That's the linear estimate of transaction cost for a single asset on a single day.
For the portfolio as a whole,
we'll add up the individual transaction costs of each asset that is traded
that day to get an estimate of total transaction cost for that day.
You'll see the step-by-step derivation of this in the coding notebook.